An Architectural Analysis of the AIER Alert System: A Deep Dive into its Hybrid AI Framework and Resilient API Logic




Executive Summary


The AIER Alert system represents a paradigm shift in the design of mission-critical clinical information systems, directly addressing the systemic fragility of centralized healthcare IT infrastructure. Recent high-profile cyberattacks, such as the 2024 Ascension Health ransomware incident, have starkly illustrated the catastrophic consequences of single points of failure, where disruptions to central servers force a reversion to manual processes, delaying care and endangering patient lives.1 In response, the AIER system is engineered around a core principle of operational resilience, achieved through a sophisticated hybrid architecture that guarantees continuity of care even during catastrophic network or cloud outages.
This report provides an in-depth architectural analysis of the AIER system, deconstructing its technology stack and operational logic. The system's foundational innovation is its dual-plane design, which pairs a lightweight, on-premise AI component for immediate, offline analysis with a powerful, cloud-based component for advanced analytics and scalability.1 The local component, built on the high-performance FastAPI Python framework and leveraging the efficiency of
llama.cpp for local Large Language Model (LLM) inference, ensures that core patient monitoring and alerting functions remain fully operational without cloud dependency. The cloud component, hosted on Amazon Web Services (AWS), handles complex case escalations and orchestrates wide-scale notifications through a decoupled, event-driven backbone.
This dual-architecture is unified by a robust failover protocol that queues and replays data, ensuring zero data loss during connectivity disruptions. Furthermore, the entire system is fortified by a comprehensive DevSecOps posture, embedding automated security checks and compliance-aware infrastructure from the initial stages of development through to production deployment. By examining the specific technology choices, the intricate API logic, and the strategic design patterns employed, this analysis positions the AIER system not merely as a software product, but as a strategic blueprint for building the next generation of resilient, secure, and intelligent healthcare systems capable of withstanding the operational uncertainties of the modern digital landscape.


1. The Hybrid Architecture: A Blueprint for Continuous Clinical Operations


The foundational design of the AIER system is its hybrid, dual-plane architecture. This is not merely a technical implementation detail but a strategic response to a fundamental vulnerability in modern healthcare: over-reliance on centralized, network-dependent systems. The architecture is predicated on the assumption that failure—whether from a cyberattack, vendor outage, or simple connectivity loss—is not a possibility but an inevitability. The system is therefore engineered to degrade gracefully and maintain its core life-sustaining functions in the face of such failures.


1.1 The Dual-Plane Design Philosophy: Architecting for Inevitable Failure


The system is explicitly bifurcated into two cooperating but independent planes of operation: a "Local Component (Offline Resilience)" and a "Cloud Component (Scalability & Learning)".1 This separation is the cornerstone of its resilience strategy.
The Local Component is designed to run on-premise, on hospital servers or edge devices physically close to the patient. Its primary mandate is to "prevent a complete fallback to manual processes" during an outage.1 This component is self-sufficient, capable of ingesting patient vitals, performing AI-driven analysis, and triggering critical alerts entirely offline. This design directly mitigates the primary failure mode observed in incidents like the Ascension Health attack, where the loss of a central IT system paralyzed clinical operations across the network.1 By retaining essential functionality at the edge, the AIER system ensures that the most critical alerts are never missed due to an external dependency.
The Cloud Component complements the local plane by providing capabilities that are impractical or inefficient to run at the edge. It handles "advanced analysis," supports "long-term model improvements" through the processing of large-scale anonymized data, and manages complex, wide-reaching notification workflows.1 This component leverages the virtually limitless scalability and powerful computational resources of the cloud for tasks that are not time-sensitive in the same way as immediate critical alerts.
This architectural choice represents a significant evolution from a "cloud-first" to a "resilience-first" ideology. While many modern applications treat the cloud as the default and only operational environment, the AIER system adopts a more mature and pragmatic approach. It strategically leverages the cloud for its undeniable strengths in data aggregation, large-scale computation, and service elasticity, but it deliberately refuses to make the cloud a dependency for its core, life-critical function. The system is architected to survive the cloud's absence, using it as a powerful enhancement for scalability and learning rather than a single point of failure. This philosophy demonstrates a deep understanding of the unique operational requirements and risk profile of a high-stakes clinical environment like an Emergency Room (ER).


1.2 The Failover and Data Synchronization Protocol: Ensuring Zero Data Loss


The lynchpin that unifies the dual-plane architecture is the system's failover and data synchronization logic. The protocol is elegantly simple in its definition: "If cloud latency/health checks fail, local continues serving and queues outbound events; when the cloud returns, it replays the queued alerts/logs".1 This mechanism is critical for ensuring that no alert, patient data point, or audit log is lost during a period of disconnection.
The implementation of this queue-and-replay mechanism carries profound architectural implications for the local component. It dictates that the on-premise server or edge device cannot be a simple, stateless application. To reliably queue events during an outage that could last for minutes, hours, or even days, an in-memory queue is insufficient, as it would be lost upon an application restart or device power cycle. Therefore, the local component must incorporate a persistent, durable storage layer for this queue. This could be a lightweight local database (e.g., SQLite), a file-based append-only log, or a similar technology capable of surviving interruptions.
This requirement transforms the local component from a mere API gateway into a stateful application responsible for its own data persistence and state management. While this introduces a degree of complexity at the edge, it is a non-negotiable trade-off for achieving the system's primary goal of resilience and its implicit promise of zero data loss. The design of this local persistence layer, including its strategies for handling queue back-pressure, data serialization, and eventual consistency with the cloud, is a critical element of the system's overall robustness. The protocol ensures that once connectivity is restored, the cloud component can be brought back to a consistent state with the local environment, preserving the integrity of patient records, audit trails, and the datasets required for long-term model improvement.


2. The Local Inference Engine: High-Performance AI at the Edge


The on-premise component is the heart of the AIER system's resilience strategy. It is a self-contained inference engine designed for real-time, reliable alerting without any dependency on external networks. Its effectiveness is the result of a carefully curated combination of technologies chosen to optimize for performance, efficiency, and deployment on commodity hardware commonly found in hospital environments.


2.1 Core Technologies: FastAPI and llama.cpp Integration


The technical foundation of the local component rests on two key technologies: the FastAPI web framework for the API layer and llama.cpp for the AI inference layer.1 This pairing is not arbitrary; it is a deliberate engineering choice that creates a highly optimized solution for the specific problem domain.
FastAPI is a modern, high-performance web framework for Python, built upon Starlette (for its ASGI capabilities) and Pydantic (for data validation). Its primary advantage in this context is its native support for asynchronous programming. An ER environment involves a high volume of concurrent data streams from potentially hundreds of patient monitoring devices. A traditional synchronous web framework would struggle under this load, as it would block execution while waiting for network I/O, leading to increased latency and dropped connections. FastAPI's asynchronous model allows the API server to handle thousands of concurrent connections efficiently, accepting incoming vital signs data without blocking the main execution thread. This makes it an ideal choice for the I/O-bound nature of data ingestion.
llama.cpp is a port of Meta's LLaMA model written in pure C/C++. Its design goal is to enable high-performance inference of LLMs on commodity hardware, including CPUs, with minimal dependencies. By using a "wheeled llama.cpp" package, the AIER system can run a sophisticated 2-4 billion parameter model locally without requiring specialized and expensive GPU hardware.1 The C++ implementation provides raw computational efficiency that far exceeds what is typically achievable with Python-native machine learning frameworks, which often carry significant overhead.
The integration of these two technologies creates a "best-of-both-worlds" stack. The system leverages Python and FastAPI for rapid development, robust data validation, and best-in-class asynchronous I/O handling. For the computationally intensive, CPU-bound task of LLM inference, it shells out to the highly optimized llama.cpp binary or uses lightweight Python bindings. This architecture effectively solves the system's core performance challenge: meeting the strict sub-5-second alert time acceptance criterion by minimizing both I/O latency and computational overhead.1


2.2 API 1 Logic: Ingestion, Validation, and Triage


API 1, the local endpoint, is far more than a simple proxy to the AI model. It functions as a sophisticated data processing and triage engine. Its logic can be broken down into a multi-stage pipeline that orchestrates the flow of data from ingestion to decision. The documentation specifies that API 1 "ingests patient vitals (like heart rate, oxygen levels)" and can accept "condition headers (ex)".1 This implies a well-defined data contract, which can be inferred as follows:
Table 1: Inferred API 1 (FastAPI) Endpoint Specification
Field
	Description
	Endpoint
	POST /v1/vitals
	Description
	Ingests real-time patient vital signs and contextual information for analysis by the local LLM.
	Request Body (JSON Schema)
	json { "patientId": "string (Hashed)", "timestamp": "string (ISO 8601)", "header": "string (e.g., '', '')", "vitals": { "heartRate_bpm": "integer", "bloodPressure_systolic_mmHg": "integer", "bloodPressure_diastolic_mmHg": "integer", "oxygenSaturation_percent": "float", "respiratoryRate_bpm": "integer", "temperature_celsius": "float" }, "notes": "string (Optional free-text notes)" }
	Success Response (202 Accepted)
	json { "status": "processing", "transactionId": "string (UUID)" }
	Error Response (400 Bad Request)
	json { "error": "Invalid data format", "details": "Field 'heartRate_bpm' must be an integer." }
	The operational logic of API 1 follows a clear sequence:
1. Ingestion: The FastAPI endpoint receives a POST request containing patient data.
2. Validation: Leveraging its native Pydantic integration, FastAPI automatically validates the incoming JSON payload against a predefined schema. This ensures data integrity and rejects malformed requests before they are processed, a crucial step for system stability.
3. Prompt Construction: The validated data is used to construct a precise, structured prompt for the local LLM. The presence of a `` header suggests a pre-triage mechanism, likely from the monitoring device itself, which would be factored into the prompt to provide the model with additional context.
4. Inference: The API invokes the llama.cpp process, passing the constructed prompt.
5. Parsing and Interpretation: The API receives the output from the LLM. As will be discussed, this output is expected to be in a structured format (e.g., JSON) to allow for reliable parsing.
6. Decision and Routing: The API executes a decision tree based on the parsed LLM output. This is the core triage function. If the model indicates a clear, non-critical status, the event is logged. If it indicates a clear critical status, an immediate local alert is triggered. If the model's output is ambiguous, indicates high uncertainty, or meets predefined criteria for escalation, the event and its payload are placed into the persistent queue for synchronization with the cloud component.1
This internal orchestration logic makes API 1 the "brain" of the local component, responsible not just for communication but for intelligent routing and decision-making.


2.3 The Lightweight LLM: Prompt Architecture and Inferred Task


The local AI is a "Lightweight Al Model (2B-4B parameters)" tasked with analyzing vitals to trigger alerts.1 As a general-purpose LLM, its ability to perform this specific, high-stakes task reliably depends entirely on the quality and structure of the prompt it receives from API 1. The success of the local engine hinges on sophisticated prompt engineering.
The prompt sent to llama.cpp is not a simple question but a highly structured template designed to constrain the model and elicit a predictable, machine-parsable response. This prompt architecture would likely include several key components:
* System Instructions: A preamble that sets the context and defines the model's role, such as: "You are an expert clinical decision support assistant. Your task is to analyze patient vital signs and provide a structured assessment of urgency. Respond only in the JSON format specified."
* Formatted Data: The patient's vital signs, header, and any notes, formatted consistently, perhaps as a JSON object or a series of key-value pairs within the prompt. This ensures the model can easily parse the input data.
* Output Schema Definition: Explicit instructions detailing the required output format. This is the most critical part of the prompt, as it forces the LLM to generate structured data that the FastAPI application can reliably decode.
An example of the requested output format might be:
{"urgency": "critical", "reason": "Potential tachycardia with borderline oxygen saturation", "confidence_score": 0.85, "requires_escalation": false}
By enforcing a structured JSON output, the system avoids the pitfalls of parsing natural language and turns the LLM into a predictable component within a larger software system. The design and refinement of this prompt template is a significant part of the system's intellectual property, representing the crucial translation layer between raw medical data and actionable, AI-driven clinical insights.


3. The Cloud-Native Platform: Scalable Escalation and Advanced Analytics


While the local component ensures immediate resilience, the cloud-native platform provides the AIER system with scalability, advanced analytical power, and the ability to integrate into broader hospital communication workflows. It is designed to handle cases that require deeper analysis and to serve as the central hub for notifications and long-term data aggregation.


3.1 The Large LLM: Architecture for Complex Case Analysis


The cloud platform hosts a "Larger Al Model (6B-7B parameters)" to handle escalations from the local component.1 These escalations are triggered for cases that are deemed "critical or uncertain" by the local model. This larger model runs on a scalable compute foundation using "Amazon EC2... or managed container services like ECS... and EKS".1 The option to use container orchestration services like ECS (Elastic Container Service) or EKS (Elastic Kubernetes Service) points to a design that prioritizes scalability, fault tolerance, and ease of deployment for the model serving infrastructure. Furthermore, the mention of EC2 implies the potential use of GPU-accelerated instances, which would be necessary to serve a 6-7 billion parameter model with acceptable latency.
This two-tier LLM architecture creates an intelligent and economically efficient analytical cascade. The vast majority of routine patient data points, which are generated continuously, are processed quickly and cost-effectively by the lightweight local model. This prevents the cloud infrastructure from being inundated with routine traffic. Only the small fraction of cases that are truly complex or ambiguous incur the higher computational cost and network latency of being sent to the more powerful cloud model.
This design functions as a funnel, using the local model as a high-efficiency filter. It optimally balances the need for immediate, low-latency analysis for all patients with the need for deep, resource-intensive analysis for a select few. This prevents the expensive and slower cloud model from becoming a bottleneck and ensures that computational resources are allocated judiciously, aligning cost with clinical necessity. This is a sophisticated architectural pattern that optimizes for performance, cost, and analytical depth simultaneously.


3.2 API 2 and the Event-Driven Notification Backbone


The cloud component's output is managed by API 2, which acts as a "dispatch" or "publication" layer. Its primary role is to take the final decisions from the AI analysis (either from the large cloud model or replayed from the local component's queue) and publish them into a broader communication and automation ecosystem. The documentation specifies that API 2 "publishes Al decisions to SNS (Simple Notification Service)" and routes automation through "AWS EventBridge".1
The choice of these specific AWS services reveals a commitment to a highly decoupled, extensible, and event-driven architecture.
* Amazon SNS (Simple Notification Service) operates on a publish-subscribe (pub/sub) model. When API 2 publishes an alert message to an SNS topic (e.g., critical-cardiac-alert), it does not need to know who the final recipients are or how the message will be delivered. The responsibility of managing subscriptions—such as an ER nurse's phone for SMS alerts, a surgeon's on-call pager, or a charge nurse's email—is handled by SNS. This decouples the alert generation logic from the notification delivery mechanism. Hospital communication protocols can change, and new subscribers can be added or removed without requiring any modification to the core API 2 code.
* Amazon EventBridge is a serverless event bus that allows for even more complex, decoupled workflows. When API 2 sends a structured event to EventBridge (e.g., a PatientStatusEscalated event containing the patient ID and AI analysis), it can trigger a multitude of different downstream actions based on predefined rules. For example, the same event could simultaneously trigger a Lambda function to update a central dashboard, page a specialized surgical team, add the patient to a high-priority watch list in the EHR system, and log a detailed audit trail in a separate security system.
This use of a pub/sub and event bus pattern is a hallmark of a mature and robust system design. It makes the AIER system incredibly flexible and future-proof. API 2's sole responsibility is to publish a well-defined, structured event. The complex, ever-changing operational workflows of the hospital are managed independently as subscribers or rule-based targets. This architectural choice ensures that the system can easily adapt to new clinical protocols and integrate with future technologies without requiring a rewrite of its core logic, providing immense strategic value.


4. Comprehensive Technology Stack and Security Posture Analysis


The AIER system is supported by a comprehensive ecosystem of cloud services and a "security-first" philosophy. The technology stack is not merely a collection of tools but a cohesive platform where each component is chosen to fulfill a specific functional or non-functional requirement. Security is not treated as a final checklist item but is deeply embedded into the development lifecycle and the operational infrastructure.


4.1 Infrastructure, Data, and Monitoring Services


The "Tools & Services List" provides a detailed blueprint of the operational environment, showcasing a sophisticated approach to data management, infrastructure automation, and monitoring.1 The following table maps key technologies to their specific roles within the architecture, justifying their selection.
Table 2: Technology Stack Functional Mapping
Technology/Service
	Category
	Role & Justification in AIER Architecture
	FastAPI
	API Framework
	Provides a high-performance, asynchronous Python backend for API 1, essential for non-blocking I/O and meeting low-latency requirements.
	llama.cpp
	AI Inference
	Enables efficient, low-overhead execution of the local 2B-4B LLM on commodity/edge hardware with minimal dependencies.
	EC2 / ECS / EKS
	Cloud Compute
	Provides scalable compute resources (including optional GPUs) required to host the larger, more powerful 6B-7B LLM for escalated cases.
	DynamoDB
	Data Storage
	Serves as the primary real-time data store for high-throughput, low-latency writes of incoming patient vitals.
	S3
	Data Storage
	Provides cost-effective, durable archival storage for historical vitals, logs, and model artifacts for compliance and future analysis.
	AWS SNS
	Notification
	Decouples the alert generation logic from the delivery mechanism, enabling flexible, multi-channel (SMS, email, push) notifications via a pub/sub model.
	AWS EventBridge
	Workflow Automation
	Acts as a central event bus to trigger complex, decoupled downstream workflows (e.g., paging teams) based on AI-driven alerts.
	KMS
	Security
	Manages encryption keys to secure all data at rest (in DynamoDB, S3) and in transit, a critical component for HIPAA compliance.
	Terraform
	DevOps / IaC
	Enables the entire AWS infrastructure to be defined as code, ensuring reproducible, auditable, and automated environment deployments.
	Splunk
	Monitoring & Security
	Provides advanced log aggregation and security analytics (SIEM capabilities) beyond standard monitoring, crucial for threat detection and incident response.
	GitHub Actions
	CI/CD
	Automates the build, test, and deployment pipeline, embedding security checks (SAST, DAST) to enforce the DevSecOps methodology.
	The data storage strategy is particularly noteworthy. The selection of two distinct database technologies, DynamoDB and S3, demonstrates a clear understanding of different data access patterns. DynamoDB is specified as the "primary vitals data store (real-time writes)".1 Its key-value, NoSQL data model is perfectly suited for the high-frequency, low-latency writes characteristic of streaming time-series data from patient monitors. This is the "hot" data path, optimized for operational performance. In contrast,
Amazon S3 is used for "archival storage for vitals history, logs, model artifacts".1 This is the "cold" data path, where data is accessed infrequently but must be stored durably and cost-effectively for long-term compliance, auditing, and the eventual retraining of AI models. This separation of operational and analytical data stores is a classic and highly effective data engineering pattern that optimizes both performance and cost.


4.2 The DevSecOps Framework: Embedding Security into the Lifecycle


The AIER project's commitment to security is evident in its adoption of a comprehensive DevSecOps framework. The documentation outlines a "DevSecOps Pipeline" with "automated security checks (SAST = Static Application Security Testing, DAST = Dynamic Application Security Testing, laC = Infrastructure-as-Code scanning)" built directly into the CI/CD workflow, likely using GitHub Actions.1 This approach creates a powerful, multi-layered defense-in-depth security posture.
This posture combines proactive and reactive security controls:
* "Shift-Left" Controls: By integrating SAST, DAST, and IaC scanning into the CI/CD pipeline, security is shifted left in the development process. SAST tools scan the source code for known vulnerabilities before it is even compiled. IaC scanning analyzes Terraform code for security misconfigurations before the infrastructure is provisioned. DAST tools test the running application in a staging environment to find vulnerabilities that only manifest at runtime. These automated gates act as a quality control mechanism, catching and blocking insecure code from ever reaching production.
* "Shield-Right" Controls: The security measures do not stop at deployment. The architecture leverages a suite of AWS security services to protect the running infrastructure. This includes IAM for fine-grained access control, Secrets Manager to avoid hardcoding credentials, KMS to encrypt all data at rest, and services like GuardDuty (threat detection) and Security Hub (centralized security posture management) for "HIPAA readiness".1 These services provide continuous monitoring of the production environment, detecting misconfigurations, anomalous activity, and potential threats in real-time.
This combination of pipeline-level and infrastructure-level security creates a robust, end-to-end security framework. It addresses multiple threat vectors, from vulnerabilities in the application code to misconfigurations in the cloud environment. This comprehensive, automated approach is essential for achieving and maintaining compliance with stringent regulations like HIPAA, as it reduces the risk of human error and provides a continuous, auditable record of the system's security posture throughout its entire lifecycle.


5. Strategic Evaluation and Future-State Recommendations


An analysis of the AIER Alert system reveals a robust, well-conceived architecture with significant strengths. However, like any complex system, it also presents potential operational challenges. By understanding these aspects and considering the project's stated out-of-scope items, a strategic roadmap for its future evolution can be formulated.


5.1 Analysis of Architectural Strengths and Potential Challenges


The system's design exhibits several key strengths that position it as a leading-edge solution for resilient healthcare IT:
* Unparalleled Resilience: The hybrid, dual-plane architecture is the system's defining feature, providing a robust solution to the single point of failure that plagues centralized systems.
* High Performance and Efficiency: The pragmatic technology choices of FastAPI for asynchronous I/O and llama.cpp for efficient CPU-based inference are perfectly matched to the problem's performance constraints.
* Extensible Notification System: The use of SNS and EventBridge creates a decoupled, event-driven backend that is flexible, scalable, and future-proof.
Alongside these strengths, the architecture implies several potential challenges that would require careful management during implementation and operation:
* Model Management Complexity: The system relies on two distinct LLMs—a lightweight local model and a larger cloud model. Managing the lifecycle of these models (a practice known as MLOps) introduces significant overhead. Ensuring version consistency, monitoring for performance drift, and managing the fine-tuning and deployment process across a distributed fleet of on-premise devices will be a major operational challenge. A centralized model registry and a robust remote deployment mechanism would be essential.
* Data Synchronization Integrity: The queue-and-replay failover mechanism is powerful but notoriously difficult to implement perfectly. The system must handle complex edge cases, such as ensuring exactly-once delivery of queued events to the cloud to prevent duplicate alerts or data entries. It must also manage potential issues with out-of-order event processing after a long outage and gracefully handle a massive backlog of queued data without overwhelming the cloud infrastructure. This requires careful design using principles of idempotency and atomic transactions.
* Deployment and Maintenance of Edge Components: Unlike a monolithic cloud application, the local component must be deployed, patched, updated, and monitored across numerous physical or virtual servers within diverse hospital IT environments. This necessitates a sophisticated remote device management and orchestration strategy to ensure that the entire fleet of edge nodes is running the correct software versions and operating securely.


5.2 A Roadmap for System Evolution


The project documentation clearly lists several features as "Out-of-Scope (Now)," including "Full integration with EHR," "Support for non-ER hospital departments," and "Large-scale multi-hospital analytics".1 These items provide a natural and logical roadmap for the system's future development.
* Phase 1: Deep EHR Integration: The next logical step is to create a closed-loop integration with Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems. This can be achieved by leveraging standard healthcare interoperability protocols like HL7 FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources). API 1 could be extended with a FHIR-compliant endpoint to receive richer patient context from the EHR (e.g., allergies, pre-existing conditions), which would dramatically improve the AI model's accuracy. Correspondingly, API 2 could be enhanced to write structured findings, alerts, and AI-generated summaries back to the patient's official record via the EHR's FHIR API, creating a seamless flow of information.
* Phase 2: Configuration-Driven Departmental Expansion: To adapt the system for non-ER departments like Pediatrics or the ICU, a configuration-driven approach should be adopted. Instead of hardcoding ER-specific logic and thresholds, the core application should be designed to load its operational parameters from a central configuration service, such as AWS SSM Parameter Store. This would allow system administrators to define department-specific LLM prompts, alerting rules, escalation criteria, and notification workflows. New, fine-tuned model variants specialized for different clinical domains could be deployed alongside these configurations, enabling the system to expand across the hospital without significant code changes.
* Phase 3: Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning for Analytics: The goal of "large-scale multi-hospital analytics" presents a significant data privacy challenge. A powerful and privacy-preserving solution would be to implement a federated learning architecture. Instead of centralizing sensitive, anonymized patient data from multiple hospitals into a single data lake for model training, the model training process itself would be distributed. Each hospital would use its local, anonymized data to compute updates to a global AI model. Only these abstract mathematical updates (model weights or gradients), which contain no individual patient information, would be sent to the central cloud server for aggregation. This approach would allow the AI models to learn from a vast and diverse dataset spanning multiple institutions—dramatically improving their accuracy and generalizability—without ever compromising patient privacy or requiring sensitive data to leave the hospital's security perimeter. This would represent a state-of-the-art solution that directly enables the out-of-scope analytics goal in a secure and compliant manner.


6. High-Level Frontend Topology and Event Handling


The user-facing component of the AIER system is a web-based Single-Page Application (SPA), designed for clinical staff to manage patient intake and monitor alerts. This frontend architecture is engineered for security, scalability, and responsiveness, leveraging a suite of AWS services to create a seamless user experience.


6.1 System Entry Point: The SPA and Content Delivery


The clinician's primary interaction with the system is through a JavaScript-based SPA (developed using a framework like React, Vue, or Angular). The static assets of this application (HTML, CSS, and JS files) are hosted on Amazon S3 and distributed globally via Amazon CloudFront. This setup ensures low-latency access and high availability, as CloudFront caches the application at edge locations close to the end-users. All communication is secured end-to-end using TLS encryption.


6.2 Authentication and Session Management


Secure access to the application is managed by Amazon Cognito, which handles user authentication and authorization.
* Event Handler: onLoginSubmit
* Logic: When a clinician enters their credentials, this JavaScript event handler captures the form data. It then interfaces with a client-side library (e.g., AWS Amplify) to securely send the credentials to Cognito. Upon successful authentication, Cognito returns JSON Web Tokens (JWTs). These tokens are stored securely in the browser session and are attached as authorization headers to all subsequent API calls, ensuring that only authenticated and authorized users can access or modify patient data.


6.3 Patient Data Intake and Submission


The core function of the SPA is patient data entry. This is handled through a dedicated intake form that captures patient vitals and other relevant clinical notes.
* Event Handler: onPatientFormSubmit
* Logic: On form submission, this handler performs client-side validation to ensure data integrity. It then constructs a JSON payload and sends an authenticated POST request to the patient intake API endpoint. This endpoint is managed by API Gateway and backed by an AWS Lambda function. The Lambda function performs final server-side validation and writes the patient data directly into the DynamoDB table, which serves as the system's central data store. The API then returns a confirmation to the SPA, which is handled by a corresponding handleApiResponse function to provide immediate feedback to the user.


6.4 Administrative Functions


The architecture includes a provision for an "Administrative Override" (ADM OVERWRITE). This suggests a protected section within the SPA, accessible only to users with elevated privileges (as defined in Cognito).
* Event Handler: onOverrideSubmit
* Logic: This handler would allow an administrator to directly modify or annotate patient records in DynamoDB. It would call a separate, highly secured API Gateway endpoint that triggers a specific Lambda function with the necessary IAM permissions to perform direct database modifications. This provides a crucial, auditable mechanism for data correction or management.
Works cited
1. API_DevSecOps.pdf